[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to have a further look at this successor limit
hierarchy of mathematical operations and connected
to a rather traditional area of modern set theory
having to do with ordinals now I'm not a big
fan of modern set theory to be honest and I
don't think the theory of ordinals really works in
its current form but nevertheless it's still going
to be interesting for us to compare this ladder
that we're creating with a similar kind of ladder
that appears in this somewhat dubious theory
of ordinals so the setup is that we're looking
at arithmetical operations on natural numbers
and we have basically two cool ways of creating
bigger operations from given operations one is the
idea of a successor and the other is the idea of a
limit so successor if we have some operations say
Circle Cross it's an actual arithmetical operation
on natural numbers so if you have two natural
numbers am and K then M Circle Cross K is another
natural number then we can Define its successor
Circle Cross Prime inductively this way we Define
how we multiply M by one to get get M and then we
Define how we multiply M by k + 1 in terms of how
we multiply M and K and here is where the original
Circle Cross operation comes in okay and the
other idea is that of a limit so if we have some
suitable sequence of operations Circle Cross one
Circle Cross 2 Circle Cross 3 and so on so by that
we mean we've put our finger on a certain pattern
that we want to ident and we have a very clear
idea of how to generate all of these so of we
have a a uniform way of getting all these elements
in this sequence then we can create something that
we could call the limit operation which is the
sort of the limit of this sequence of mathematical
operations and it is also an operation and here's
its definition so M Circle Cross Infinity K is
defined in terms of one of these in fact in terms
of the K one so it's m Circle Cross k k so we look
at the second entry of the two numbers that we
have here the K and then we go down our sequence
to find the kth one and we use that to multiply M
and K and that's the definition of this thing here
so this is especially powerful when K is big as K
gets big then we're using bigger and bigger typic
Al um operations here to generate bigger and
bigger numbers now there's a little bit of an
art form here because we'll see that it's not
entirely obvious what a suitable sequence means
here okay so at this stage this is just a kind
of an art form and I'm going to explain to you
how I cook up this hierarchy but you will see that
there's a pattern to it which can be explained but
I prefer to explain it a little bit later rather
than right now so you'll see it in practice and
then we'll get a sense of what actually happens
more generally all right so these are the starting
U points for creating this very interesting and
uh actually in some sense very fundamental uh
hierarchy of mathematical operations as a somewhat
more compact way of writing this limit expression
we'll write it also in this fashion using an arrow
so here's Circle Cross one Circle Cross two Circle
Cross three these are some operations that we've
identified as forming an interesting sequence and
then we'll denote their limit with this Arrow
okay so so far we've established this successor
limit hierarchy looking like this we've started
with addition that's our starting operation and
then taking successor of addition gives us
multiplication which we call star one taking
successor of that we got got exponentiation which
is star two taking the successor of that is the
triangle operation which was star three and we can
keep going that direction that's a well- defined
sort of sequence of operations defined inductively
each is the successor of the previous and the
limit of that sequence is what we call Star n so
we're using star n here rather than star infinity
and then that's just a starting point for a new
sequence of successors so we can take the success
of this one which is star n + 1 then the successor
this one star n + 2 Star n + 3 and then we have a
new sequence here this one followed by this one
followed by this one which has a limit star to
n and then the successor of that one is star 2
n + 1 and then 2 N plus 2 and then 2 n + 3 and
then this new sequence also has a limit in similar
fashion which is star 3n okay so these are limit
operations they are of a different character
than these ones these are successor operations
because they are successors of previous
operations these ones are not successors
they're created from using entire sequence so
we call them limit operations and then we saw
this rather interesting new thing that we
could do which is to look at these limit
operations and regard that as the first one and
that's the second one and that's the third one
and that then generates a new sequence of
operations and of course then we can take that
limit and we get something which should probably
be called star n s this is also a limit operation
but it's a limit of limit operation so it's some
sense one level up maybe we can denote that with
the these two circles here sort of signifying
it in this particular case although we're not
going to use circles more generally just to to
get you oriented in this fashion here so this
is sort of where we are at um currently and we
want to go further we've seen already this is a
humongously big operation and generates numbers
which are wildly Beyond uh any of our abilities
to imagine but anyway we still want to carry
on and create higher operations and sort of see
how this structure goes now as we write more
and more of this hierarchy we're conscious of
wanting to write it as efficiently as possible
so we'll introduce a slightly different notation
here we'll dispense with three dots and we'll
always just usually write three things and then
go to the limit so we'll start with addition and
we'll put a comma here representing the fact that
that this first one actually is a successor
of of this one here so the comma before this
entry alerts us to the fact that this is actually
a successor operation and then we have comma star
two comma star three and then we'll dispense with
the three dots and just put an arrow to our first
limit operation star n okay so what we've got
so far then we had star n plus one star n plus
2 Star n plus 3 and then these uh three here give
us a limit which is star 2 N then a successor 2
n + 1 2 n + 2 2 n + 3 and then these last three
generate a sequence with limit star 3n and then
we saw that we could create a new limit this limit
of limits because up to this point here we can see
that there are three limiting operations the ones
that are followed directly by an Arrow this star n
star 2 N and star 3 n and so once we have three of
anything then we can think about taking the limit
of the sequence which starts with those three okay
so that's what we're doing here now this new Arrow
here telling us that there's a new limit and this
limit is the limit of the previous limiting ones
and that's star N squared all right so now let's
carry on okay so the successor of n s and I might
not always say star n s I'll just say n s for
short so the successor of n^2 will be n^2 + 1 and
then n^2 + 2 and then n^2 + 3 and now these three
successors generate a new limit which is n^2 + n
which has successor n 2 + n + 1 and then successor
N2 + n + 2 n 2 + n + 3 and then these last three
form a sequence of successors with limit n^2 + 2
N which has successor n^2 + 2 n + 1 and then n^
2 + 2 n + 2 and then n^2 + 2 n + 3 with limit n^2
+ 3 n now note that um the story from here to here
here to here is very similar so we have a new kind
of sequence here that we can take the limit of so
here is now a limit a limit and a limit so there's
three limits and we can use that to generate a new
limit of limits which is star 2 n^ 2 now you might
say well why don't we go back earlier I mean this
was not the first limit that was the first limit
but the point is this is the first limit after
this limit of limits so we've gone to the limit
of limits and then we kind of erase the slate
and start again back where we were and then this
is the next limit after this limit of limits then
another uh limit here and then another limit here
and we use those three to create a sequence which
has limit this one here so this is another limit
of limits and then we could create its successor
and then its successor and then its successor
and then the limit of these ones would be star
2 n^2 + n so we're kind of getting into a Groove
here and let me just make some observations about
the pattern that we're trying to establish here
that successor operations follow commas so if you
have an operation and you look just in front of it
and there's a comma then that's telling you that
this operation is a successor it's a successor
of the one that's previously uh to the left of
that comma limit operations follow arrows so if
you look at some operation and it has an arrow in
front of it that's telling you that that's a limit
operation limits of limit operations follow two
or perhaps more consecutive arrows so in other
words this thing here for example here is a uh
something which is has an arrow in front of it but
the one in front of it has an arrow in front of it
so there's actually two consecutive arrows here
in front of this one here as opposed to in front
of here there's only one consecutive arrow and
be before that there was a comma so here there's
two consecutive arrrows in front of that that's
telling us that this is a higher kind of operation
it's a limit of limit operation like so far we
have uh star n squ being of platform and star 2 n^
2 okay it's an excellent exercise for you now
to perhaps pause if you're interested in this
business pause and sort of stare at this and
absorb it it's rather subtle there's a subtle
but sort of elegant pattern here and it's Pleasant
for you to continue this just to write down what
the next terms are going to be see how far you
can extend this well why don't we be a little
bit more efficient we've seen that it's rather
unnecessary to keep repeating these stars all
the time because each of these are operations and
they have subscripts so really we only need to
take care of the subscripts we need to only record
the subscripts and let's do that and let's start
in that Spirit by agreeing that this addition
operation might be Associated to the subscript
zero that's sort of consistent with what we're
doing okay so here is then a rewrite of what
we've just done but now we can write a little bit
bigger because these are no longer subscripts so
we have zero and then we have 1 2 3 with limit n
then n + 1 n + 2 n + 3 with limit 2 N and then 2
n + 1 2 n + 2 2 n + 3 with limit 3 n and then
n 2 N and 3 n are the limits three successive
limits whose limit is n s then successors
N2 + 1 N2 + 2 N2 + 3 these have limit N2 + n
successor n^2 + n + 1 n 2 + n + 2 N2
+ n + 3 these ones have limit N2 + 2
N successor n^2 + 2 n + 1 n 2 + 2 n + 2
n 2 + 2 n + 3 with limit N2 + 3 n and now
these last three limits that we had N2 +
n N2 + 2 N and N2 + 3n have limit 2 n 2
because it's already an n s and the n 2 N 3 n
have limit n s so all together we have 2 n^ 2
okay now we can keep going a little bit beyond
the last slide 2 N2 + 1 2 N2 + 2 2 N2 + 3 with
limit 2 n 2 + n successor 2 n 2 + n + 1 2 n^ 2 +
n + 2 2 n 2 + n + 3 these have limit 2 n^2 + 2 N
successor 2 n^ 2 + 2 2 n + 1 2 n 2 + 2 n + 2 2 n
2 + 2 n + 3 with limit 2 n 2 + 3 n all right so
now we have the limits this is a limit that was
the last limit and the one before that was this
so we had 2 n 2 + n 2 n 2 + 2 n 2 n 2 + 3 n those
last limits have a limit of limits which is 3 n^
2 Okay so now uh we have another 3 n s
and that is then combined with that's
a limit of limits yes and so that's not
the first limit of limits that we had let
me just um we double that one there that was a
limit of limits and where was the previous one
it was this one here that was a limit of limits
because it has two arrows in front of it and then
the first one was just n sared here all right so
these three were not just limits they were limits
of limits they were a littleit higher level and so
they form a sequence whenever we have a sequence
of something that's identifiable and kind of a new
pattern we want to identify and say aha we've got
something going on here we can take the limit of
this pattern so we can take the limit of n squar
2 n^ 2 and 3 n^2 and that's a new kind of thing
which is n cubed that deserves to have not just
one or two circles around it but in fact three
circles it's a kind of level three type of limit
okay so that's uh quite cool um and now
I want you to pause and give some thought
to the following question what should be
the next one on this list at this stage
okay it's a little bit of a puzzle for
you so please pause the video and give
some thought as to what do you think the
next one in our hierarchy is going to be
okay so maybe some of you would have thought well
it's going to be n Cub plus one the successor of
this one but that's not the right answer the right
answer is to observe that we have something going
on here that started with this first limit so
let me draw that with a single thing that was
a regular sort of first level limit and then
a little while later we got n^ s which was a
second level limit and now we've got an N cubed
which is a third level limit aha we see a pattern
here that we haven't seen before we see three
consecutive things which are forming a pattern
which has an obvious continuation if we kept
on going in the usual fashion you could expect
that eventually we would get n to the fourth
and then eventually n to the 5ifth and so on
so there's another pattern of these things where
we have successive powers of n but that's already
identified at this level here because there's
the first one there's the second one there's
the third one so those three are already
going to generate a new sequence which has
limit n to the n
that's the natural limit of n n^2 n cubed n
to the N now how many uh circles should we
put around that one well not one not two not
three we should put perhaps n circles around
that well n is just a symbol so we should
perhaps forget about the number number of
circles and rather think about the level or
the index of the circles so this is level one
this is level two this is level three this
is level n okay so this is very analogous
to what we're doing up here we started
with something at level one then level
two then level three and then the next
one in sequence was something of level
n so this suggest that as we keep going
here we could create new and new fellows
whose levels themselves reflect these ones
here so that eventually we're going to get
something with which is going to be the
first thing of level n plus one and then
of level n plus 2 and then of level n plus
3 and then something of level 2 N and so
on so very interesting new phenomena at this
stage here suggesting also that there's really
an expansion of interest and subtlety as we're
proceeding here things are getting more and more
interesting and this tower that we're creating
somehow is reflected in the first part of
it so I'm going to leave it to you as a great
exercise to explore what happens as we carry on
this way and of course to a certain extent it's uh
may seem arbitrary that just decisions that we're
making about which sequences to consider to be
suitable ones but I think if you play around with
it for a while you'll start to convince yourself
that there's something god-given about this this
is not just me making up stuff that there's some
natural progression here that carries on at least
to a certain level all right so we're going to
talk more about how this thing carries on but in
the meantime think be great for you to think about
how to extend it yourselves great practice in some
kind of abstract mathematical maybe almost
computational mathematical um investigation
[Music]